This was Fedora at CS50x.ni
###########################

:date: 2017-3-31 15:07
:tags: cs50x.ni, events, fedora
:category: floss
:slug: this-was-fedora-at-cs50x.ni
:summary:
:lang: en

On Tuesday, March 14th, the `Fedora Nicaragua <http://fedora.org.ni/>`_
community and the `CS50x.ni <http://code-fu.net.ni/>`_ staff, with the support
from `Fundación UNO <http://fundacionuno.org/en/>`_ and the Fedora Project, we
had the opportunity to meet to see a series of lectures in which the speakers
shared their experience using Free Software, the importance and benefits of the
different software tools used in the CS50x.ni course. The lectures were aimed
for anyone who is taking the CS50x.ni course currently, or who wants to take it
in the future or people interested in learning more about free software and
more specifically about the Fedora Project.

The meeting was in the basement of the north wing of the Rigoberto López Pérez
building of the National University of Engineering in the Simón Bolívar Campus,
in the classrooms dedicated to the CS50x.ni (Coding) project.

The talks began at 9:00 AM, as the first presentation we had a `"Fedora Project
Overview" <https://fedorapeople.org/~mayorga/slides/this_is_fedora.odp>`_
facilitated by `Eduardo Mayorga
<https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/User:Mayorga>`_.  Eduardo a Fedora Project
Ambassador, Package Maintainer and is currently part of the group of students
who are participating in the course CS50x.ni, explained to us what the Fedora
Project is about, its mission and vision as a Free Software project, and also
gave us a look at what is being part of this community both locally and
internationally.

.. image:: {filename}/images/fedora_at_cs50xni/mayorga.jpg
   :align: center

The second talk was given by `Neville Cross
<https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/User:Yn1v>`_, Founder and Leader of Fedora
Community in Nicaragua. In his talk Neville motivated the attendees to know
more about the importance of mastering the command line tools shipped in all
the GNU/Linux distributions. Neville made a demonstration on the use of `SSH
remote management tools
<https://yn1v.fedorapeople.org/Slides/ssh_una_presentacion_corta.odp>`_ in
which he showed how to access a computer connected in the same network from a
second computer through a command line and talked about some tools that allow
monitoring resources, all this remotely.

.. image:: {filename}/images/fedora_at_cs50xni/yn1v.jpg
   :align: center

The third talk was facilitated by `Daniel Drake <http://reactivated.net/>`_.
Daniel is an operating system developer originally from the UK settled in
Nicaragua for 8 years. Daniel came as part of Project One Laptop per Child, the
talk was related to `"Employment Opportunities related to Linux after CS50"
<https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=0ByFPl6lV1b_MRHROTmFQTkQ1V3c>`_,
in which Daniel shared his experiences and advice acquired over 15 years of
experience as a developer and contributor of Free Software projects such as
`The GNOME Project
<https://www.openhub.net/p/gnome/contributors/16149077045725>`_.  Daniel has
also been a leader of the development team `Linux Kernel
<https://www.openhub.net/p/linux/contributors/13490492289501>`_ for the `Gentoo
distribution
<https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/log/?qt=author&q=daniel+drake>`_,
and shared tips on being part of Free Software projects and emphasized the
benefits of contributing to projects through the experience one acquires by
working with talented people from all over the world.

.. image:: {filename}/images/fedora_at_cs50xni/dsd.jpg
   :align: center

In the last block of talks `Porfirio Páiz
<https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/User:Porfiriopaiz>`_, contributor of the Fedora
Projet and student of the CS50x.ni course, gave 3 examples of how the Fedora
distribution can be a very useful tool for students of the CS50x.ni with
demonstrations on the use of tools such as the `"Getting started with Git"
<https://porfiriopaiz.fedorapeople.org/Slides/comenzando_con_git.odp>`_ talk
where he made a small demo about the workflow for managing code version control
system. In a second talk he did, `"A brief introduction to Docker"
<https://porfiriopaiz.fedorapeople.org/Slides/breve_introduccion_a_docker.odp>`_
he talked to us about how this tool is being used in the CS50x.ni to provide an
easy and simple programming environment for those who are taking the course.
And in a third talk he shared about how to set up a `"Development Workstation
with Fedora"
<https://porfiriopaiz.fedorapeople.org/Slides/estacion_de_trabajo.odp>`_.  In
this talk Porfirio spoke about one of the products offered by the Fedora
Project for all those who are focused on achieving a work environment with the
objective of materializing their software project ideas using Fedora as a basis
to build them, making use of the different programming languages available
between the Fedora software repositories, as well as other tools.

.. image:: {filename}/images/fedora_at_cs50xni/porfiriopaiz.jpg
   :align: center

And as a final surprise, the members of Fedora Nicaragua, together with the
staff of the CS50x.ni, shared with the audience a pleasant time full of talks,
exchanges of ideas and experiences accompanied by cold drinks and delicious
pizza, which was kindly sponsored by the Fedora Project.

.. image:: {filename}/images/fedora_at_cs50xni/fedora_at_cs50xni.jpg
   :align: center

The Fedora Project Users and Contributors Community are keen to continue with
these sessions of talks and conversations focused on topics that are of great
help and interest to those who are entering the wonderful world of programming
thanks to the CS50x.ni.

Sorry for the late post here is a happy Hot Dog:

.. image:: {filename}/images/fedora_at_cs50xni/beefy_miracle.gif
   :align: center