i3
##

:date: 2018-11-29 2:53
:tags: dnf, fc29, fedora, postinstall
:category: floss
:slug: i3
:summary: Improved tiling wm
:lang: en

In this post I will explain how to do a Fedora 29 installation with the i3
window manager. It is common to see installation guides for i3, but they assume
that you already have another desktop environment previously installed.

In this post we will see how to build a fully functional environment from a
minimal installation as I have explained in other publications.


Creating an installation medium
===============================

Download the ISO Fedora Everything Netinstall
---------------------------------------------

From the site: https://alt.fedoraproject.org/ download the file of the All
section, this is an ISO that works as a means of installation by network that
downloads all the packages that will be part of the system from the Internet,
as well as gives the option to choose which package collections to install,
unlike Lives media whose software selection has been previously defined.

Download the ISO with wget:

.. code-block:: console

   wget -N -t 0 -c https://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/fedora/linux/releases/29/Everything/x86_64/iso/Fedora-Everything-netinst-x86_64-29-1.2.iso

We also download the integrity check file:

.. code-block:: console

   wget -N -t 0 -c https://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/fedora/linux/releases/29/Everything/x86_64/iso/Fedora-Everything-29-1.2-x86_64-CHECKSUM

Check the integrity of the file:

.. code-block:: console

   sha256sum -c Fedora-Everything-29-1.2-x86_64-CHECKSUM

Create the installation media with Fedora Media Writer
------------------------------------------------------

Fedora Media Writer is available for different operating systems, download the
corresponding one.

It is very important to create the installation medium with Fedora Media Writer
since this tool guarantees that the installation medium will have support to
boot on computers that have both UEFI or BIOS.

How it will start will depend on which of the two has the highest priority
during startup. I always use UEFI only, so all my systems are installed in UEFI
mode.

https://github.com/FedoraQt/MediaWriter/releases/tag/4.1.1

When Fedora Media Writer is installed on our computer, we connect our USB
memory, run Fedora Media Writer and use the Custom Image option to navigate to
the path where the ISO is, the one we just downloaded, select it, select
carefully the USB memory we will use and record the image in the USB memory.

Installation
============

I have followed the installation steps described in this previous post, making
sure I have access to a wireless network or a wired network.

https://porfiriopaiz.github.io/blog/posts/anaconda-y-lvm-sobre-luks.html

This time I had to use my mobile phone, although it is true I had access to a
wireless network during the installation of the base system (Fedora Custom
Install), after installation the packages collection of does not provide the
network drivers required to access wireless networks since they are not
included in the Custom Install selection.

That's why I created a wired network via USB with my mobile phone. To make it
work you have to make sure of the following right after the first boot once the
installation finishes:

1. Log in in the system.
2. Connect the USB cable to the computer.
3. Connect the other end to the mobile phone.
4. Make sure the phone is connected to a wireless network or that the data plan
   is activated. As a note, consider that you need at least 800MB of data in
   RPM packages that must be downloaded for a minimum installation of Fedora
   with support for the graphical environment with i3wm.
5. Make sure the phone is in USB or MTP data transfer mode.
6. Activate a wired network or Tethered Wired Network from your mobile phone.

After this, you should have access to the Internet. Check it by pinging Google:

.. code-block:: console

   ping 8.8.8.8

Basic configurations
====================

Configuring dnf
---------------

The next step is optional, as root, the first thing I do is configure dnf, so
that it uses the most efficient packages mirrors:

.. code-block:: console

   echo 'fastestmirror=true' >> /etc/dnf/dnf.conf

Then I disable the use of deltarpm's for future updates. If you prefer to
reduce the amount of data to be downloaded in each of the future updates, skip
this step:

.. code-block:: console

   echo 'deltarpm=false' >> /etc/dnf/dnf.conf

I always keep each of the packages from which any program is installed on my
system, including those that are downloaded as part of the updates and to
maintain the packages cache throughout the period I use a Fedora release. This
step is optional and you can skip it if you want:

.. code-block:: console

   echo 'keepcache=true' >> /etc/dnf/dnf.conf

Now I proceed to disable a service and a dnf timer. The service makes sure to
refresh the metadata cache to be able to make checks on the versions of the
packages that are in the repos and then check if there are updates available.
The timer is responsible for executing the service periodically.

I always disable both to avoid annoying bandwidth consumptions and dnf locks
while the cache is refreshed. If you have a limited bandwidth or data plan this
will help you reduce the consumption of it.

.. code-block:: console

   systemctl disable dnf-makecache.service
   systemctl disable dnf-makecache.timer

Finally to make sure that the changes take effect we must restart:

.. code-block:: console

   reboot

Regenerate the cache and install available updates
--------------------------------------------------

During the installation, you may have omitted to check the option that allows
you to install the most recent version of the mirrors packages, so your system
could be outdated even if you have used the network installation medium.

To apply the most recent updates and use the most efficient mirrors it is
necessary to regenerate the metadata cache.

Fedora maintains a cache for each user, one for the root user, another for the
normal user, in my case pionen. So we must regenerate both caches if you want
to perform tasks as administrator or simple queries that do not require
administrator privileges:

As a normal non-root user:

.. code-block:: console

   dnf clean all

   dnf makecache

Then, as a normal non-root user, we execute the following commands, where we
pass the statement in quotes as a parameter to the root user:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf clean all'

   su -c 'dnf makecache'

We check for available updates and enter our root password:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf --refresh check-upgrade'

If there are updates available, we apply them with:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf upgrade'

If updates have been applied, it is recommended to restart the system in order
to make use of the most recent version of all the programs, for example the
kernel:

.. code-block:: console

   reboot

Installing i3
=============

Now, the step by step with all the requirements for a Fedora 29 minimal
installation with i3wm.

For it we will make use of packages collections that have been grouped in a
very specialized way. Next commands must be executed as root user.

Common NetworkManager Submodules
--------------------------------

This group contains NetworkManager submodules that are commonly used, but may
not be wanted in some streamlined configurations.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install networkmanager-submodules

Core
----

Smallest possible installation.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install core

Dial-up Networking Support
--------------------------

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install dial-up

Fonts
-----

Fonts packages for rendering text on the desktop.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install fonts

Guest Desktop Agents
--------------------

Agents used when running as a virtualized desktop.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install guest-desktop-agents

Hardware Support
----------------

This group is a collection of tools for various hardware specific utilities.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install hardware-support

Multimedia
----------

Audio/video framework common to desktops.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install multimedia

Standard
--------

Common set of utilities that extend the minimal installation.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install standard

base-x
------



.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install base-x

Input Methods
-------------



.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y group install input-methods

Fedora Icons Theme
------------------

This package provides the Fedora icons theme.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install fedora-icon-theme

GNOME Icons Theme
-----------------

This package provides the default icon theme used by the GNOME Desktop.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install gnome-icon-theme

GNOME Icons Theme extra
-----------------------

This package provides additional mime type and devices icons for the GNOME
Desktop.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install gnome-icon-theme-extras

i3 Window Manager
-----------------

Finally we can install the i3 window manager.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install i3

Installing the graphical login manager
--------------------------------------

We will need a graphical login manager where we can pick our user and type our
password so we can get authenticated. From here we can also select other
desktop environments that we might install in the future.

LightDM is a display manager that welcomes the user and uses the GTK3 tool kit.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install lightdm-gtk

xdg-user-dirs
-------------

Contains xdg-user-dirs-update that updates and creates the directories at
/home/, according to the predefined values configured by the administrator.

.. code-block:: console

   dnf -y install xdg-user-dirs

Enabling the graphical mode boot
--------------------------------

Our system already has all the requirements to work as a graphical environment
using i3 as a window manager. But before it, we need to change some
configurations that make our system boot from runlevel 3 mode or
multi-user.target to runlevel 5 or graphical.target.

We can fix that with the next command:

.. code-block:: console

   systemctl set-default graphical.target

Also we must enable the system service that provides the option to access the
system via a graphical loging that we just installed, lightdm:

.. code-block:: console

   systemctl enable lightdm.service

Finally we can reboot our system and then after we should be able to get logged
in makeing use of the graphical session manager and our window manager i3.

.. code-block:: console

   reboot

First graphical session
=======================

Once logged in, i3 will ask if you want to generate a new config file for i3,
press Enter to answer affirmatively.

Next it ask which key you want to use as modifier key to trigger the i3
keyboard shortcuts, I always pick the `Win` or the Windows key, also known as
`Meta key`.

Terminal command line
=====================

This setup does not provides any presintalled tool for web browsing, file
manager, image viewer or pdf reader.

It is up to you what to use and install.

― But, how do I install those?

If you selected the Windows key as modifier for i3, pressing:

<Win> + Enter

You will be able to run a command line terminal. I prefer to use GNOME
Terminal:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf install gnome-terminal'

Then by pressing:

<Win> + d

Trigger `dmenu` from where you can invoke GNOME Terminal by typing
`gnome-terminal`.

In the next post I will explain my i3 post-install.

Login out and powering off
==========================

To log out from our session:

<Win> + <Shift> + e

This triggers a dialogue asking for if you want to end your i3 user session.
Click on `Yes, exit i3` and then while on `lightdm` press:

<Alt> + <F4>

To turn off your system.

I hope this post help you to achive a minimal install. This is a good and cheap
way to setup virtual machines, without expending lot of resources or even for a
working environemt for ancient devices with minimum and limited resources.