repos
#####

:date: 2019-7-11 23:32
:tags: fc30, fedora, postinstall, repositories
:category: floss
:slug: repos
:summary: A list of the software repositories I use on Fedora
:lang: en

Software Repositories
=====================

Once we solved the problem of getting connected to the Internet and how to
launch a terminal, you might want to install all the software you use.

The software comes from somewhere, on Fedora these are called *Software
Repositories*, next I detail which are the ones I enable on all my Fedora
installs apart of the officials that comes preinstalled and enabled by default.

Open a terminal and enable some of these.

RPMFusion
---------

RPM Fusion is a repository of add-on packages for Fedora and EL+EPEL maintained
by a group of volunteers. RPM Fusion is not a standalone repository, but an
extension of Fedora. RPM Fusion distributes packages that have been deemed
unacceptable to Fedora.

More about RPMFusion on its official website: https://rpmfusion.org/FAQ

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf install https://download1.rpmfusion.org/free/fedora/rpmfusion-free-release-$(rpm -E %fedora).noarch.rpm https://download1.rpmfusion.org/nonfree/fedora/rpmfusion-nonfree-release-$(rpm -E %fedora).noarch.rpm'

Fedora Workstation Repositories
-------------------------------

From the Fedora wiki page corresponding to Fedora Workstation Repositories:

The Fedora community strongly promotes free and open source resources. The
Fedora Workstation, in its out of the box configuration, therefore, only
includes free and open source software. To make the Fedora Workstation more
usable, we've made it possible to easily install a curated set of third party
(external) sources that supply software not included in Fedora via an
additional package.

Read more at: https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Workstation/Third_Party_Software_Repositories

Please note that this will only install the \*.repo files, it will not enable
the provided repos:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf install fedora-workstation-repositories'

Fedora Rawhide's Repositories
-----------------------------

Rawhide is the name given to the current development version of Fedora. It
consists of a package repository called "rawhide" and contains the latest build
of all Fedora packages updated on a daily basis. Each day, an attempt is made
to create a full set of 'deliverables' (installation images and so on), and all
that compose successfully are included in the Rawhide tree for that day.

It is possible to install its repository files and just temporarily enable it
for just a single transaction, let us say, to simple install or upgrade a
single package and its dependencies, maybe, to give a try to its new version
that is not currently available on any of the stable and maintained versions of
Fedora.

This is useful when a bug was fixed on Rawhide but it has not landed yet on the
stable branch of Fedora and the urge for it cannot wait.

Again, this will just install the \*.repo file under ``/etc/yum.repos.d/``,
this will not enable it. Later we will see how to handle, disable and enable
this repositories for just one transaction.

More on Rawhide on its wiki page: https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Releases/Rawhide

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf install fedora-repos-rawhide'

COPR
----

Copr is an easy-to-use automatic build system providing a package repository as
its output.

Here are some of the repos I rely on for some packages:

neteler/remarkable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Remarkable is a free fully featured markdown editor.

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf -y copr enable neteler/remarkable'

philfry/gajim
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Gajim is a Jabber client written in PyGTK, currently it provides support for
the OMEMO encryption method which I use. This repo provides tools and
dependencies not available in the official Fedora repo.

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf -y copr enable philfry/gajim'

dani/qgis
~~~~~~~~~

QGIS is a user friendly Open Source Geographic Information System.

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf -y copr enable dani/qgis'

donet-sig/dotnet
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This provides the .NET CLI tools and runtime for Fedora.

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf copr enable @dotnet-sig/dotnet'

VSCodium
--------

Few weeks ago I decided to give a try to VSCodium, a fork of VSCode, here is
how to enable its repo for Fedora.

First import its gpg key, so you can check the packages retrieved from the
repo:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'rpm --import https://gitlab.com/paulcarroty/vscodium-deb-rpm-repo/raw/master/pub.gpg'

Now create the vscodium.repo file:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c "tee -a /etc/yum.repos.d/vscodium.repo << 'EOF'
   [gitlab.com_paulcarroty_vscodium_repo]
   name=gitlab.com_paulcarroty_vscodium_repo
   baseurl=https://gitlab.com/paulcarroty/vscodium-deb-rpm-repo/raw/repos/rpms/
   enabled=1
   gpgcheck=1
   repo_gpgcheck=1
   gpgkey=https://gitlab.com/paulcarroty/vscodium-deb-rpm-repo/raw/master/pub.gpg
   EOF
   "

Verification
============

Now check that all the repos has been successfully installed and some of them
enabled by refreshing the ``dnf`` metadata.

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'dnf check-update'

Thats all, in the next post will see how to enable some of this repos, how
temporarilly disable  and enable some other for just a single transaction, how
to install or upgrade certain packages from an specific repo and many repo
administration tasks.
