JOSM
####

:date: 2021-07-22 20:46
:tags: deb11, debian, josm
:category: gis
:slug: josm
:summary: The Java OpenStreetMap editor
:lang: en

JOSM is, in my opinion, the best editor for OpenStreetMap I have ever used, and
it is also the best Java software I have ever used.

In this post, I will cover how to get it installed on Debian, how to properly
configure it for mapping on OSM, and which plugins to install and use.

Installing JOSM on Debian
=========================

JOSM is available in the Debian official repository, so to install it, you just
need to open a terminal and run the following command:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'apt-get install josm'

Solving JOSM Outdated Version on Debian
=======================================

Installing JOSM from the official Debian repositories resolves the dependency
issue you would encounter when using the most up-to-date version from the
official .jar build.

To run the latest stable version, you need to download it from the official
JOSM website as a JAR file. However, before doing that, you need to run the
version installed from the Debian repository at least once.

.. code-block:: console

   josm

This will create the following directory structure:

.. code-block:: console

   ~/.config/JOSM
   ~/.cache/JOSM
   ~/.local/share/JOSM

Under ``~/.cache/JOSM/``, a directory named ``jar`` will be created:

.. code-block:: console

   mkdir -p ~/.cache/JOSM/jar

Now, navigate to that directory:

.. code-block:: console

   cd ~/.cache/JOSM/jar

Next, download the latest version of the JOSM editor using wget:

.. code-block:: console

   wget -N -t 0 -c https://josm.openstreetmap.de/josm-tested.jar

To run the newly downloaded version, use the following command:

.. code-block:: console

   java -jar ~/.cache/JOSM/jar/josm-tested.jar

Script Launcher
===============

To launch the JAR file easily, you can create a script. First, create an
executable file:

.. code-block:: console

   touch ~/.local/bin/tested-josm.sh

Then, add the following content to the script:

.. code-block:: console

   #! /bin/bash
   java -jar ~/.cache/JOSM/jar/josm-tested.jar

Adding a Launcher
=================

To make this process even easier, let's create a launcher for the manually
downloaded JOSM JAR file and the previously created script.

Create a new desktop entry file:

.. code-block:: console

   touch ~/.local/share/applications/org.openstreetmap.josm.desktop

Then, add the following content to the file:

.. code-block:: console

   [Desktop Entry]
   Type=Application
   Version=1.0
   Name=JOSM Tested
   GenericName=Java OpenStreetMap Editor
   Comment=Extensible off-line editor for OpenStreetMap (OSM)
   Icon=org.openstreetmap.josm
   Exec=/home/pionen/.local/bin/tested-josm.sh
   Terminal=false
   MimeType=application/x-osm+xml;application/x-gpx+xml;application/geo+json;application/x-josm-session+xml;application/x-josm-session+zip;x-scheme-handler/geo;
   StartupNotify=true
   Categories=Education;Geoscience;Maps;
   StartupWMClass=org-openstreetmap-josm-MainApplication
   Keywords=OpenStreetMap;OSM;

The next time you restart your computer, you will find the new launcher. By
clicking on it, you will launch the most up-to-date version of JOSM on Debian.
