K8
##

:date: 2021-07-14 17:37
:tags: deb11, debian, keychron, k8
:category: floss
:slug: k8
:summary: Swap from multimedia keys to function keys as the primary option
:lang: en

Back in February, Guido van Rossum posted on Twitter a picture of his desk with
a large mouse pad.

`Guido van Rossum's tweet <https://twitter.com/gvanrossum/status/1365796969617104897>`_

What got my attention from this picture was the keyboard. Down in the comment
section, I found the manufacturer and model of this keyboard. 

`Keychron K8 Product <https://www.keychron.com/products/keychron-k8-tenkeyless-wireless-mechanical-keyboard?variant=32018253021273>`_

I have always wanted to try mechanical keyboards but never knew
exactly which one to get or try. Seeing that this is the preferred one from a
respectable developer, I decided to go for this same model.

The very specific configuration I wanted was not available at the time I was
ordering it, so I subscribed to get a notification via email when the
same configuration became available again.

I ordered mine on June 3rd, the keyboard was shipped from Hong Kong to Miami
and arrived in the next 5 days. The keyboard arrived in Nicaragua 25 days
later.

The first thing I tried to do was to set up the keyboard with my T440p running
Debian 11 Bullseye via Bluetooth. For this, I installed Blueman, which provides
a MATE applet:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'apt-get install blueman'

With the switches on the keyboard set to Windows and Bluetooth, the Blueman
applet running, and following the instructions in the booklet included in the box,
I was able to pair my Keychron K8 via Bluetooth with my T440p running Debian.

I had to manually add my keyboard as a new device with the applet and then pair
both devices.

Over Bluetooth and in Windows mode, the swap from multimedia keys to function
keys worked, but in wired mode, this did not work.

I found some hints on how to fix this in the official Facebook support group
for Linux users of Keychron, which led me to this very specific command that must
be run on every startup so that the primary option for the F1 to F12 keys
becomes function keys instead of multimedia keys.

.. code-block:: console

   echo 0 | sudo tee /sys/module/hid_apple/parameters/fnmode

Later, I found this documentation that provides at least 3 different ways to
ensure this command is executed on every startup:

`Ubuntu Keyboard Configuration Help <https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AppleKeyboard#Change_Function_Key_behavior>`_

From the 3 options listed there, I decided to go for the one that makes use of
the sysfs.conf file. So, I installed ``sysfsutils``:

.. code-block:: console

   su -c 'apt-get install sysfsutils'

And added this line at the end of the file **/etc/sysfs.conf**:

.. code-block:: console

   module/hid_apple/parameters/fnmode = 0 

I then restarted the computer, and while in cable and Windows mode, I pressed the
key combination:

.. code-block:: text

   Fn + x + l

After doing this, the primary option for the F1 to F12 keys will be the function
keys instead of the multimedia keys.

To modify the screen brightness, turn the keyboard backlight on and off, or mute
and unmute the audio, you must press the Fn key plus the function key (Fn +
F1 or Fn + F2). This will allow you to continue using your K8 on Linux
with the switches in Windows/Android mode, in wired or Bluetooth mode, with the
function keys as the primary option instead of the multimedia keys.
