`vi`
####

:date: 2022-10-31 3:32
:tags: deb11, debian, vi
:category: floss
:slug: vi
:summary: The Vi text editor
:lang: en

====================================
 Understanding vi and vim on Debian 
====================================

Since 2011, I've steadfastly embraced `vi` as my primary text editor. My journey
into the realm of mastering the command line interface and transitioning away
from the comfort of the graphical user interface began early on. Among the
foundational skills I aimed to acquire, one of the first was the efficient
editing of text files.

Surprisingly, the exact catalyst that initially led me to embrace `vi` has faded
into the distant recesses of my memory. Nevertheless, over eleven years later,
my loyalty to `vi` remains unwavering. It has been a constant companion
throughout this journey, and I've never strayed into the world of alternative
text editors. In fact, I've even employed `vi` for basic Python programming
tasks, underscoring its versatility and enduring utility in my daily computing
endeavors.

In this post, I intend to delve deep into the intricacies of how Debian manages
the functionality of `vi` and vim right from a basic, uncustomized Debian
installation.

My objective is to gain a profound understanding of the fundamental behaviors
exhibited by `vi` and vim in their most minimalist configurations, as they are
presented immediately after a fresh Debian installation.

It's worth noting that Debian does not include vim by default in this scenario.
I opted for a network install using the minimal tasksel profile, selecting only
the 'mate-desktop-environment' package. This illustrates one of the aspects I
greatly appreciate about Debian – its commitment to delivering essential
software components, allowing users the freedom to shape and personalize their
tools and environments according to their specific needs, without making any
presumptions about what's best for them.

`vi`
==

A pristine Debian installation defaults to including only the 'vim-tiny'
package. Within this package, two critical configuration files are stored in
'/etc/vim/': 'vimrc' and 'vimrc.tiny'.

This setup is intentionally minimalist, devoid of any symbolic links, aliases,
or binary files associated with 'vim'. Consequently, the sole alias present is
`vi`, which is directly linked to 'vim.tiny'.

When `vi` is invoked, it effectively calls 'vim.tiny', which, as the default
behavior, exclusively sources the file located at '/etc/vim/vimrc.tiny'.

Now, let's explore the contents of the '/etc/vim/vimrc.tiny' file:

.. code-block:: console

   " Vim configuration file, in effect when invoked as "vi". The aim of this
   " configuration file is to provide a Vim environment as compatible with the
   " original vi as possible. Note that ~/.vimrc configuration files as other
   " configuration files in the runtimepath are still sourced.
   " When Vim is invoked differently ("vim", "view", "evim", ...) this file is
   " _not_ sourced; /etc/vim/vimrc and/or /etc/vim/gvimrc are.
   
   " Debian system-wide default configuration Vim
   set runtimepath=~/.vim,/var/lib/vim/addons,/usr/share/vim/vimfiles,/usr/share/vim/vim82,/usr/share/vim/vimfiles/after,/var/lib/vim/addons/after,~/.vim/after
   
   set compatible
   
   " vim: set ft=vim:

Essentially, this configuration ensures that `vi` (which invokes 'vim.tiny')
closely mimics the behavior of the original `vi`. Furthermore, it automatically
loads configuration files found under the "$VIMRUNTIME" directory, which
includes both "~/.vimrc" and any configuration files specified in the
"runtimepath" variable.

In this specific case, it prioritizes the inclusion of
"/usr/share/vim/vim82/debian.vim" and then "/usr/share/vim/vim82/defaults.vim."

As a final touch, it enforces compatibility with the original `vi`, even if
other configuration files in the "runtimepath" attempt to disable it, by
appending the "set compatible" directive to the end of the configuration file.

In the absence of any other `vim` versions installed on the system, `vi` will
naturally point to "vim.tiny" by default.

.. code-block:: console

   pionen@lilit:~$ ls -la /etc/alternatives/vi
   lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 16 Oct 12  2022 /etc/alternatives/vi -> /usr/bin/vim.tiny

Conversely, if `vim` is explicitly installed and invoked as 'vim,' or via
aliases such as 'view' or 'evim' (note that none of these aliases are available
in this minimal setup), the configuration files '/etc/vim/vimrc' and
'/etc/gvimrc' are activated and sourced.

.. code-block:: console

   " All system-wide defaults are set in $VIMRUNTIME/debian.vim and sourced by
   " the call to :runtime you can find below.  If you wish to change any of those
   " settings, you should do it in this file (/etc/vim/vimrc), since debian.vim
   " will be overwritten everytime an upgrade of the vim packages is performed.
   " It is recommended to make changes after sourcing debian.vim since it alters
   " the value of the 'compatible' option.
   
   runtime! debian.vim
   
   " Vim will load $VIMRUNTIME/defaults.vim if the user does not have a vimrc.
   " This happens after /etc/vim/vimrc(.local) are loaded, so it will override
   " any settings in these files.
   " If you don't want that to happen, uncomment the below line to prevent
   " defaults.vim from being loaded.
   " let g:skip_defaults_vim = 1
   
   " Uncomment the next line to make Vim more Vi-compatible
   " NOTE: debian.vim sets 'nocompatible'.  Setting 'compatible' changes numerous
   " options, so any other options should be set AFTER setting 'compatible'.
   "set compatible
   
   " Vim5 and later versions support syntax highlighting. Uncommenting the next
   " line enables syntax highlighting by default.
   "syntax on
   
   " If using a dark background within the editing area and syntax highlighting
   " turn on this option as well
   "set background=dark
   
   " Uncomment the following to have Vim jump to the last position when
   " reopening a file
   "au BufReadPost * if line("'\"") > 1 && line("'\"") <= line("$") | exe "normal! g'\"" | endif
   
   " Uncomment the following to have Vim load indentation rules and plugins
   " according to the detected filetype.
   "filetype plugin indent on
   
   " The following are commented out as they cause vim to behave a lot
   " differently from regular Vi. They are highly recommended though.
   "set showcmd		" Show (partial) command in status line.
   "set showmatch		" Show matching brackets.
   "set ignorecase		" Do case insensitive matching
   "set smartcase		" Do smart case matching
   "set incsearch		" Incremental search
   "set autowrite		" Automatically save before commands like :next and :make
   "set hidden		" Hide buffers when they are abandoned
   "set mouse=a		" Enable mouse usage (all modes)
   
   " Source a global configuration file if available
   if filereadable("/etc/vim/vimrc.local")
     source /etc/vim/vimrc.local
   endif

When we execute "vim" in the command line, and subsequently issue the "vim"
command:

.. code-block:: console

   :echo $VIMRUNTIME

The following output will be displayed:

.. code-block:: console

   /usr/share/vim/vim82

Inside `vim`, when we execute the command:

.. code-block:: console

   :scriptnames

It will display a list of all the script files that are loaded based on the
"/etc/vim/vimrc" configuration file:

.. code-block:: console

     1: /usr/share/vim/vimrc
     2: /usr/share/vim/vim82/debian.vim
     3: /usr/share/vim/vim82/defaults.vim
     4: /usr/share/vim/vim82/filetype.vim
     5: /usr/share/vim/vim82/ftplugin.vim
     6: /usr/share/vim/vim82/indent.vim
     7: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/syntax.vim
     8: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/synload.vim
     9: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/syncolor.vim
    10: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/getscriptPlugin.vim
    11: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/gzip.vim
    12: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/logiPat.vim
    13: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/manpager.vim
    14: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/matchparen.vim
    15: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/netrwPlugin.vim
    16: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/rrhelper.vim
    17: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/spellfile.vim
    18: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/tarPlugin.vim
    19: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/tohtml.vim
    20: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/vimballPlugin.vim
    21: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/zipPlugin.vim
   Press ENTER or type command to continue

If, for any reason, we have already created a "~/.vimrc" file, the inclusion of
"/usr/share/vim/vim82/defaults.vim" will be skipped:

Inside `vim`, upon executing the command:

.. code-block:: console

   :scriptnames

You'll observe that instead, "~/.vimrc" takes precedence and gets sourced:

.. code-block:: console

     1: /usr/share/vim/vimrc
     2: /usr/share/vim/vim82/debian.vim
     3: ~/.vimrc
     4: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/syntax.vim
     5: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/synload.vim
     6: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/syncolor.vim
     7: /usr/share/vim/vim82/filetype.vim
     8: /usr/share/vim/vim82/ftplugin.vim
     9: /usr/share/vim/vim82/indent.vim
    10: /usr/share/vim/vim82/syntax/nosyntax.vim
    11: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/getscriptPlugin.vim
    12: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/gzip.vim
    13: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/logiPat.vim
    14: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/manpager.vim
    15: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/matchparen.vim
    16: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/netrwPlugin.vim
    17: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/rrhelper.vim
    18: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/spellfile.vim
    19: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/tarPlugin.vim
    20: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/tohtml.vim
    21: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/vimballPlugin.vim
    22: /usr/share/vim/vim82/plugin/zipPlugin.vim
   Press ENTER or type command to continue

This implies that if we require specific settings from the
"/usr/share/vim/vim82/defaults.vim" file, we should incorporate them into the
"~/.vimrc" configuration file.

It's important to note that any configurations from "/usr/share/vim/vimrc" and
"/usr/share/vim/vim82/debian.vim" will be overridden by settings in "~/.vimrc."

Having this understanding, I now have clarity on what to adopt from
"/usr/share/vim/vim82/defaults.vim" if the need arises.

In the upcoming post, I will explain my choice of "vim" versions available in
the Debian repository and the rationale behind my selection.
